what they cannot and will never understand is that what they and other liberals call populism
is the political blowback, is political blowback against the social disruption that their policies
have produced. They can't understand the connection between what they've done and populism.
Today's guest is very much an original thinker. He's independently minded. Of course,
everyone likes to think they're independently minded, but over the course of his career,
he's pissed off just about everyone. He first shot to the forefront of the national conversation
about 25 years ago, writing a trenchant critique of globalization and being entirely skeptical,
pessimistic even, about the possibility of a successful war of occupation in either
Afghanistan or Iraq. On both counts, he was proven right.
Now he's turned his attention to the West. He says that the parties of recent decades,
cultural, social and economic, are over that the status quo can't carry on that we're very much
at a crossroads. So what next? He thinks the future will in many ways resemble the past.
Perhaps things like religion, ultranationalism, maybe even feudalism might be on their way back.
Big questions and different answers to what you'd hear elsewhere,
but that's what we like here on Downstream. John Gray, thanks for joining us.
Very pleased to be here, Erin. Very pleased to be talking to you today.
We're very happy to have you. I just wanted to start by saying I first read you around 2001,
Fullstone and thereafter Straw Dogs, but Fullstone I think was the first time I'd read you. I was 17.
For me, that put you on the map. Obviously, you existed well before then and we'll talk about
that as well. What was the response to that book? Because it was a very provocative thesis at the
time, namely that globalization, ever larger swathes of the planet falling under the guise of
liberal market capitalism isn't necessarily going to happen and maybe it has some big downsides and
some people didn't quite agree with your conclusions, did they?
Well, it was considered off the wall because it was published at a time
when globalization as a mood and an idea and a profitable project was at a tight.
So if I'd been calculating the time to do it, I wouldn't have done it then.
And the reviews it got were without exception, with one exception, I think a friend took pity
on me halfway through the process, but were all extremely negative. I mean, normally my books
polarize people in a Marmite-like way. This didn't. Everyone hated it. And I thought at the time
that, and I think I still think this, it simply went against the mood. The Cold War had ended,
it was supposed to have ended in victory. Although even 10 years before I published
False Dawn, I'd written in a conservative magazine a piece on Fukuyama's essay before he
wrote the book. The essay came out in the fall of 1989 before the world came down,
but very close to the time when it came down. I had written then that the coming collapse of
communism, which I thought was going to happen, would be the resumption of history on very
traditional lines. It would not be the end of history at all. I mean, I think I later joked it was
rather like one of Beckett's stories where he, which contains the line, the end again.
It wasn't the end of anything. It was the resumption of history because the Cold War was a rather
anomalous period in which global politics, not completely because there were the non-aligned
movements and so on and so forth, but was organized in a binary opposition between two
Enlightenment ideologies. And that was very liberalism and communism. They both spring from
the Enlightenment as a broad family of ideas. And liberalism appeared two of one, but I never
thought that it had one because it was liberal. I'd knew some of the people in Poland who were
and other East European countries who were working against the Soviet control of their
countries. And some were intellectuals, but many were religious intellectuals. Some were Catholics.
Many were nationalists. I mean, what brought down communism was not intellectual dissenting.
It wasn't economic inefficiency. It was solidarity, the Roman Catholic Church and Baltic nationalism.
Now, they were, so even before it happened, my interpretation of the weakness, the fragility
and the ultimate collapse of the Soviet project was completely different from that of Western
liberals. My interpretation of it was that what was happening, it was that these regimes were
becoming illegitimate, even in Russia, ultimately. But before that, in communist Europe and in the
Baltic states, they were becoming more and more illegitimate and hollow, even among their servants,
even the elites were less and less willing to use force to rule. And that this was not because
liberalism was spreading as a universal ideology. It was because in nationalist and religious and
other traditions, particular traditions and particular forms of life and thinking in these
different countries were reasserting themselves. So I never expected that it would turn into a
universal liberal hegemony, not for a single moment. So when I 10 years later published
False Dawn, I wasn't surprised either. I was surprised by the intensity and the
consistency and the near uniformity of the negative reaction. But then I reasoned.
That's because we're at the height of this project now. It'll take a while. And it took a long time,
actually, it took almost till now, that the globalizing project would fragment partly for the
it partly fragmented because of things I didn't anticipate, like the pandemic. Although I do say
in Straw Dog, someone reminded me, I'd forgotten that if you have long term plans, don't ask your
financial advisor, ask an epidemiologist. Because even then, 2001 or 2002, when it appeared,
I'd been reading about the way plagues had had an impact on various junctures in history.
So I hope it's a rather digressive answer to your question. But I think these thoughts then were so
antagonistic to the ruling worldview at the time, and the ruling mood at the time,
which is one of boosterism. Remember, one thing I've learned is this, is that if you have a
a view which everyone accepts as being the truth, and it promises good things and is also profitable,
which so if you if you talk to banks on those days, which I did a bit and you say to them,
as I did, China will not become a liberal state will not happen. Why will it not happen? Because
first of all, this is in the 90s, they looked at what happened in the Soviet Union, they're not
going to repeat it. Secondly, it's a Leninist state and the judicial system and the courts are all
subject to the party. It's not going to change. Thirdly, every enterprise that have any significance
and generally big enterprise has party categories implanted in which we have to be consulted at
every point. They're not going to permit a revolution and a liberal state could only come
about in China by a revolution. So it's not going to happen. No one believed me. First of all,
because it meant that the ruling worldview was false, which while worldviews last, which is
sometimes not very long, they're very contagious. Group think heard thinking comes in. And secondly,
it would have made them doubtful about the profits they were going to make. So when you have a
conjunction of group think with the prospect of serious money being made, it's irresistible.
So it goes on for as long as the profits seem to come in or as long as the underlying geopolitical
tensions don't become too obvious, which they now have. So now we're almost into a position where
de-globalization has become a cliche. We're almost in a position in which everybody accepts
that globalization role, which it is in many important respects, but not all. Does that answer
your question? It answers my question very well. I think for younger listeners and viewers,
people younger than, say, 25, they will find it almost impossible to believe quite how distinctive
and sincerely held the ideology you just said was. If you said to somebody,
no, I don't think China will actually get more liberal. They would say, well, of course,
they will have rising GDP, they'll be falling birthright. The bourgeoisie will emerge.
And the bourgeoisie, they would say, they could do with a bit of Marxism on this,
has always been liberal. It hasn't always been liberal. The bourgeoisie in Europe in the
mid-20th century backed fascism, not liberalism. It's a complete historical myth.
Well, yeah. Or you look at the rise of anarchism at the turn of the 20th century, late 19th century,
the guy that killed McKinley. These were basically small business owners. They were radicalized members
of the petty bourgeois. They were attracted to anarchism. The idea that they would fall
in behind some sort of stolid progressive bourgeois ideology. Anyway, the funniest point
for me was in about 1989, 1990, when I would say, what's going to happen
is that history will go on as usual. And people said, you're an apocalyptic pessimist.
So if you say things are going to go on as normal as they've always done,
you're an apocalyptic pessimist. If you say they're going to change completely from what they've
ever been, you're a realist. Now, when I was in Washington in the 89, 90, one of the things
that happened then is that some of the big foundations that were backing foreign policy
programs, these ones I knew were mostly on the right, pulled most or all of their money out.
So was this like the Atlantic Council people? I can't remember now.
Heritage, all of those people were getting them. They either cut it down or cut it off
because they said it's not needed. We won. And we haven't just won for five years or 10 years
or even a generation. We've won forever. So the idea that, I mean, this was what Fukuyama
calls capital letter history, capital letter history, Hegelian history, Koyevian history.
These were, that's to say, a certain idea, a certain conception of what it means to be recognized,
to be seen as a human being had become universal, always in the process of becoming universal
or near universal. And nothing could stop that. But it could be accelerated so that
what I didn't anticipate until it began to be clear around about 2001, 2002, I suppose,
is that the people who believed this would want to accelerate this inevitable process
by regime change. That's to say, you could say the whole world is changing on these lines.
There might be a few holdouts. There might be a few Taliban. There might be a few
nationalists here and there. But basically, the whole world is accepting this idea,
this big capital letter. But that's the way it's going to be. But if it's somewhat slower
than we imagined, by then, more than 10 years after the fall of the wall, it was become,
we can accelerate it by not just one, but a succession of wars of choice. Now, by the way,
I don't say they were the only reasons or the only people who were pushing for these wars. There were
military bureaucrats in the Pentagon, some of them. There were supposedly hard
men and women thinkers and so on and tough guys of various kinds who, for their own reasons,
wanted the war. But I don't think it would have happened. I was there a lot in those days.
I don't think it would have happened without the new conservatives. They created the background.
There were other people who supported it. It was a coalition of supporters of the war with
different views. What changed, though, with all this? Because are you a fan of science fiction?
Yes. Yeah. So you look at people like the Foundation series, or you look at Duke
publishing the 50s and the United States. Now a movie. Yeah, two movies.
Yeah, great. It was just a great book, and it has such a firm grasp on what the long span of
history, how empires and enmity and all these primal things you're talking about, nations,
religion. Not only that, but Dune is much more interesting to me than Asimov or Star Wars,
because it's neo-feudal. Well, precisely. But it's in the distant, distant, distant future.
But it's the feudal future. And one of the things about this...
It's a very modern book, right? Yes. Well, a very 21st century or late 21st century book,
because one of the things about one of the features of the worldview, and this was common,
I think, to Marxism as well as liberalism, but certainly of that worldview was the idea of
irreversible phases in history. If you'd gone through feudalism and into liberal capitalism,
you could never go back. You can go back. Not exactly to feudalism, because that was, of course,
an agrarian economy based on land, but you can go back to a set of social relations
and political structures, which are very like feudalism. They're not quite feudalism. As you
know, in my book, I discussed the arguments of some people in America who say, we've got feudalism.
It's not quite feudalism. In some ways, it's worse than feudalism, because in feudalism,
tremendous corruption, wars of religion, so on and so forth, power of the church,
censoring ideas, and so on. They're all those kind of features, but you couldn't actually easily,
not many people until the early modern period when feudalism began to fray. Not large numbers of
people didn't fall out of the system altogether into freefall, which has happened in America.
That's to say, you've got large numbers of people, hundreds of thousands or even millions,
who are basically, apart from some bits of public welfare and charity and crime,
have no position in society at all. That didn't happen. But in other respects,
you can have, and according to some American critics of their own type of society,
you do have a near feudal relation. So I think what's interesting about science fiction or the
science fiction writers who did not accept an Asimov-like or a Star Wars-like view that
these liberal ideas would spread not only all over the world, but all over the galaxy,
all over the world. They thought that previous social forms involving things like, I mean,
loyalties are a big thing in Dune, is it not? Hierarchy. People are told what they can do and
not do. Religion or obligation of and shamanism of various kinds is there. Divination is there.
Roman practice, they've reinvented. Even pre-futile has Roman elements as well in which
divination and other practices were important. So I think there are, I think science fiction,
I mean, I knew J.G. Ballard, who at one point in his life was a science fiction writer,
who wrote other genres as well, of course. But I think science fiction of the best sort is a
good lens to view the present. The great thing with the Foundation series is, and like you say,
there's almost two competing visions of how history works, Foundation and Dune, is that
it offers an amazing snapshot at how people thought, you know, this thing called, we now
call it, in reflection, the great acceleration, permanently rising populations ever greater.
Go on forever. Yeah, you know, because he talks about the, you know, the population of this
ginormous empire. So that would be too big for the plant. You know, in the tens of billions and
billions of billions of people, when in reality, what we know is in the 21st century, this plant's
population, probably about 10 billion, and then start to fall. But like you say, they were making
inferences from the early 1800s. It'll go from 10, 10 billion to 100. Yeah, this will go on forever,
or of course it did. But there were two reasons they were wrong. I mean, the big expansion of
population in human history was over two or 300 years, not two or 3000 years, let alone 30,000
years. It happened as a, as a, as a byproduct, I think, of hydrocarbons of industrialization.
So it was quite, it's quite brief, quite brief 300 years.
Well, you know, my grandmother, my grandmother, she died at 98. She was born in a world where
there were two billion people. She died this year. She died in a world where there are eight
billion people. So that is incredible, right? The planet's population quadruples in the span
of a person's life. Wow. So their idea was that that two or 300 years was a template for universal
history forever after. Now one, back to nature, that things like that never happen in nature.
You never have, in the natural order of things, it all, it all turns on the view that on the
belief which liberals have, but never admit to, I never believe, liberals generally nowadays don't
admit to ever having any of the beliefs they really do have, or that they've, that they've had in the
past. It turns on the idea, which not only liberals, but some Marxists as well, have that
the human animal can do a very con humanized nature or transcend nature. They might say, well,
this might have been true in the days of Malthus. It might have been true in the days of the Roman
Empire. Plagues might have been important in ancient Rome and so on, but why in a completely
different perspective. What they didn't bring out was a feature I'd argued in rather rudimentary form,
perhaps, in false stone, which is that the more integrated a global economy and a global
civilization was, the more fragile it would be. I mean, until, I suppose the start of the 20th
century, when you had a world flu epidemic, plagues weren't global because most of the human
beings in the world lived in economies that were separate from each other. They didn't touch each
other very much, and it's no accident that when you had big plagues in the ancient world, they
were in Rome, which was an early experiment, if you like, in globalization and closely
interconnected by trade. So they didn't take on board that the either in history, in earlier
periods of history, like the Roman period, or in the natural, in the systems of nature,
natural systems, growth of this exponential kind is never full stop, never permanent.
It always comes to some kind of stop. I want to pick up on something that you said,
because this is really fascinating. And it was one of those two or three insights of the book,
which just really hit me. One was this idea that, and we've said it many times on this show,
you know, we're reverting to a genre of capitalism, a kind of political economy,
which in some ways resembles feudalism, gains in productivity only go to the top 1%,
increasingly profits and revenues generated through asset ownership,
renterism, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. This is not no arbitrage, not production.
Yeah, exactly. Value, capture, not creation, blah, blah, blah. People have been saying this
for like 15 years. What you say is that actually, in some ways, the system we have now is worse
than feudalism. Can you explain why? Because I think obviously most people would disagree with that.
Well, in one reason is the one I've already given you, but it's connected with the one reason is
that large parts of the formerly productive population in Western countries, particularly
United States, have no productive role in the society. And since their identities,
their communities, but also their medical care and their incomes depend on their role in the economy,
they have nothing basically. And one of the things they don't have is what people had in the
feudal period. Of course, if you're a Marxist or a certain kind of liberal rationalist, you say
that this is just an illusion that pacified them. Even though they knew the society around them
was thoroughly corrupt, they still actually, I think, believed, I mean the evidences they believed
that in the rationality of society, which was that it was an afterlife in which injustices
would be corrected. It might also be hierarchical after and after, but it would be much better.
By the way, the reason we know they believed this is that there were also radical and revolutionary
millenarian movements in the Middle Ages, which said we do believe this, but we don't accept the
society. So the millenarians in the proto-communists, if you like, in the late medieval early modern
period were not atheists ever. They were eschatological Christians, that's to say they believed
that they believed these legitimating rules. Now the difference now is that, I think, and this is
new, but something that young people can, I think, understand. No one really expects now.
Certainly no one's confident. Certainly no one thinks it's inevitable, but actually hardly anyone
really expects the rest of their lives or their children's if they have children or their children's
children's lives to be better than theirs. That's a fundamental change. It's a fundamental, a really
profound change because the the militaristic ideology of increasing material well-being
interlocked with the progressive ideology that each stage of emancipation society built on the
previous one. So women get the vote, they're partially emancipated, still very unequal,
but that can be remedied once that's happened. Prisoners can get basic rights, ethnic groups
to struggle against colonialism. It was a kind of, it was a stadial theory, it was a theory of
stages, and the assumption was that each stage that had been reached in the past would remain fixed,
would remain there. Now one of the features of the 20th century, that was disproved in Europe,
because Europe in the interwar period saw tremendous conflicts of ideologies and ethnicities
and so forth. And when the Nazis then came, they swept away, not only, I mean they achieved,
it isn't that they went from some kind of level of staircase three back to staircase two, they went
to minus 20, sweeping away enormous amounts of what had been achieved before, sweeping away even
the good bits of the Bolshevik civilization were swept away. But this is happening now as a
common experience and not in the context of catastrophic wars necessarily. The common experience
now is that there'll be many young people who will say to you, I'll never be able to afford to own
a house. I can't even afford to rent in London. If one room in London is now over a thousand pounds a
month, one room, I just can't do it. And they don't see a point in the future where that will be
different. So it's most acute though, I mean if you have some kind of a job, if you have some kind
of education, if you live in a country where there are, however semi-collapsed till some welfare
institutions and NHS and with all of its problems and others, then people can sink into a mood of
resigned hedonism, which I think is a common response. But if you're in, if you have nothing at all,
if you live in a semi-collapsed of state of nature in a post-industrial
part of the United States where there is epidemic drug use, then you'll have what is now in fact
happening, which is huge levels of early death, falling longevity. I think longevity in Mississippi
is roughly that of Bangladesh. Just building on what you said there, there's a great line in the
book which basically says religion historically was the opium of the masses and now they're just
being offered opium, fentanyl, oxy-concentrate. But before they were offered fentanyl, they were
offered the future. Precisely. So this is the typology I sort of just want to quickly offer. So
like you say, feudalism, you have eschatological afterlife, modernity, you have like you said,
the future, world temporarily embarrassed millionaires, the sort of American ideology.
And now, like you say, we don't even have that. There is no future. So you have high inequality
potentially under all of these scenarios, personal income deprivation, suffering. But like you say,
there are two big amelioratives in those first two categories, feudalism, pre-21st century
capitalism, let's say, mid-20th century capitalism. And then now we have something quite distinct.
And you also see this, I think, in the built environment. The built environment across much
of the UK and the United States is just collapsing. It is collapsing. Literally in many cases.
It's a visible expression of giving up on both faith and the future. We have buildings now
built for 30, 40 years, which look like crap, don't really serve any purpose. And nobody
thinks they'll be there three or four decades from now. And not only that, but they're becoming
either toxic or fragile. With the cladding and the rack concrete. Let's think of a period though
in our history, one which I'm old enough to remember even, in which this was not the case.
There was a period after the Second World War in not just in Britain, but in other Western
countries, European countries in America, when the state assumed certain responsibilities
for moderating inequality, mitigating suffering, and reinforcing social cohesion.
They weren't, in other words, old labor weren't anti-capitalists, but they wanted to
restrain capitalism. And they thought it was necessary to do so. Why did they think that?
Because many of them had lived through the 1930s. They were from a generation that had not only
fought in the Second World War, so they knew what could happen when a social system had
melted down. But even some of them were old enough to remember the tremendous meltdown of
capitalism, which had triggered Nazism, which had triggered various fascist movements, or at
least energised them. And so then in the after the Second World War, for maybe up to a generation,
30 years perhaps, mid-70s, there was a system in many European countries, which was called
Social Democracy, and I think had many achievements to its name. And so that was the kind of,
it depended on an environment which began to change, even as early as the late 70s, I would say,
but an environment in which there were relatively close economies, in which there wasn't much
globalization. It only really began to get going in China and elsewhere, the market
reforms began to get going in late 70s. But for 30 years, there was a more
restrained form of capitalism based on what? Based on the perception, the experience,
not just the theory, that capitalist economies can go badly wrong. When they go badly wrong,
they can be really badly wrong, and that can have terrible political repercussions,
including fascism. That was common sense, and it was well founded common sense among
the old Labour people. That was then, that insight was then lost in the 80s, and after the 80s.
Well, let me give you again, maybe an anecdote. I came from a northeastern working class background,
and in the first part of my life in the 50s, Britain was still poor after the Second World War,
was still a poor country. And yet, NHS doctors came out if you had a cold, a flu.
I remember them coming to my house, unthinkable now, even before the pandemic, that anyone would
come out for anything short of a major emergency. And yet, well, we are richer even now. You might
be getting poorer now, actually, but we have been richer. What changed? What changed was
the global environment of capitalism, and the dominant beliefs about the state, and about what
the state should do and not do. And this is produced in Britain, a tremendous confusion. So,
part of the confusion was that when Brexit became an issue, most of the Brexiters in the run-up to
2016, thought that Brexit was a window to further globalization, to an even smaller state.
Most of the people who voted for it did not share that.
No, of course not.
Yeah. But that's created, I mean, that's one of the reasons why the Brexit project has been
aborted and botched.
Let's return to Brexit in a second, but I just want to stick on this. So, you say that...
There was a period.
There was a period, and these people weren't anti-capitalist. So, what I would say to that is,
and that's obviously correct, is that those people today would be classified as anti-capitalist.
So, if you say... And this is... There's a great talk by Eric X. Lee about the Chinese Communist
Party, and it's a TED talk. And he said elsewhere that we still believe in markets in China.
We still... There's still money making money, ergo capital. The big difference is that those who
make political decisions don't view the interests of capital as superseding the national interest
of the public good. That's what he says. So, the interests of capital aren't the sort of
political sum on bonds.
Although, let's never forget that the power of workers to resist capital in China is even
less than it is in China.
Absolutely, absolutely.
Much less.
Yeah, but it's a really interesting...
It's a really interesting insight.
I know trade unions for a while.
No, absolutely. I'm not... I'm not sort of sad.
No, I know.
Yeah. But it's a really interesting insight, which is to say that, okay, well, China has markets,
China is deeply embedded in global sort of production, commodity chains, yada, yada, yada.
What is different? Because clearly, there are differences in terms of the sort of political
decisions.
Well, the difference I say in the book is, and this is maybe...
But let me just talk, because I want to stick with this, because I think what he's saying
about the public good, about certain values taking priority over the interests of capital,
I think that broadly applied to European social democracies from 45 until the late 1970s.
And so, I think...
And even earlier, because in that article you wrote about boots.
Yeah, yeah, exactly. But if you say... But if you said that now...
The capitalists themselves accepted limitations on what they could do.
But if you're a politician now and you say that, you say there should be limits on what
capital can do, where it can go, what it can buy, that is viewed by...
As anti-capitalists.
Yes. Yes.
So Ernest Bevan would be an anti-capitalist for the lobbyists and news people in 2023,
even though he obviously never was.
Yeah, yeah. And Peter Shaw would be anti-capitalist.
And Hugh Gateskill would be anti-capitalist.
Quite. Well, this is one of the absurdities of presentism,
that one of the features of intellectual and public life now is that what went before even
20 years before. Sooner it'll be five years, maybe it'll be five minutes.
It's just vanished. It's just erased. So if you'd say, well, you know, you can go to a
library, there are still libraries, you can look up on the internet, you can buy books on Amazon,
they're still there, and A-books and so on, written by these people, where they criticize
many aspects of capitalism, and that would now lead them to be viewed as almost revolutionaries
anti-capitalists, but were then normal, moderate opinion. So we get all this utter nonsense about
centrism. Centrism means a kind of a collation of policies, none of which are popular, many of which
are radically rejected by most of the population, but they're attenuated and triangulated to the
point in which it's thought that they can be put over on the population. That's what centrism is.
Most of the centrist ideas, most of them are extremely unpopular,
rejected by large parts of the population. Most of the rich population, for example,
favours, as I do, but I think it's not going to happen, it's not possible, favours nationalization,
taking back to some form of public ownership, most of the utilities,
obviously water, large parts of energy, maybe parts of the banks, railways and so on, that would be a
very good move, and if you check even conservative voters, well over half, sometimes 67% here,
very good idea, why don't we do it? It's an extremist idea now, well then you've got to,
it's represented as an extremist idea. Now there are reasons why it might not be possible,
including some I've talked about in some of my recent, it might not be possible because
Britain is very highly exposed to international capital flows. So if these policies were done
in a way which the markets perceived to be dangerous to the financial system, the markets would
veto it, so it might be that it is impossible, but there's nothing extreme about them.
They were the common bread and butter of British politics from, at least from the Second World War
before that of course as well, but from the 45, the government of 1945 up to, even I would say
periods of statureism, because as I mentioned in my book, she had these rather charming inconsistencies,
we can never privatise the post office because the queen's head is on the steps. Now that was
actually a deep thing. She didn't grasp the way in which liberated markets, dissolved the culture
around them, including the national culture. She strongly opposed, I think BA as British
Airways changed the logo on the back of the plane and took the flag off, strongly opposed,
couldn't understand that BA was now a global capitalist entity.
She should have read some marks about how capital, about how markets can dissolve previous
traditions, there's all in the communist manifesto. Absolutely, whether that was where
Marx was right, it was prophetic, but she wouldn't have done that, but in her favour,
she also, and this is in false dawn, she responded to an account of Phukyama's
ideas saying, end of history, beginning of nonsense, didn't believe any of that rubbish.
She saw the kind of bourgeois society, basically an idealised model of the 1950s,
actually, or even the 30s. She saw that as something that required political struggle.
She thought it could be revived. The paradox was, and this is what she was sort of skewered on,
this paradox, and the deepest paradoxes are the ones that the people involved in them never,
never understand, was that what she did in the economy destroyed all possibility and even then
all memory of the society she wanted to rebuild. That's the deep paradox of Thatcherism, which
I began to understand myself, maybe from about 87 to 88 and onwards, and that was when I
became, adopted a slightly bookaridist role of making cryptic criticisms of all this,
very unwelcome criticism. I didn't end up in a camp or something or a cell like
Buchanan, but they were very unwelcome. When she was still in power, although she never embraced
Phukyama's theory, her own view of the world and that of many Thatcherites had become a form of
universal triumphalism, a kind of upside down Marxism. What I'd objected to in Marxism,
you might not take this view, but is what I object to in all radical progressive ideologies,
which is the contempt they display for the casualties of progress. Say, well, but
4 million, 10 million Russian peasants died. Well, they were peasants. People know what
cultivated. Did they have degrees? Were they graduates? The left response would be, well,
precisely all this happens with regards to the formation of markets in the whole world, right?
The Irish famine, for instance, is the exact same phenomenon. I suppose a reasonable, I hope,
left response would be, that's absolutely correct. The point is that market ideologues don't
understand they did the exact same thing. No, they don't. When there had been moderate forms
of capitalism, that was understandable. But when a more radical form of capitalism was reinvented
or invented a new form even, actually, because it was more global than it had ever been before,
even in the colonial period, it was more global than that. There was this, to me, very repellent,
morally repellent, even aesthetically repellent view that if there are groups that can't fit
into this, well, let them go. So they would go by living in broken down cities. They'd
gradually, some would leave, some would die, some would have short lives. And this is on a bigger
scale happening in America, where, of course, as we've discussed earlier in our conversation today
are, and there are these really large numbers of deaths from drugs. I mean, of course, that's,
I mean, you can look at it another way. You could say, you know, drugs are the hyper-capitalist
commodity. It's interesting, but if you, many of the big series in television and series in the
last few years coming out of America have been about ordinary people, middle-class people and
other people entering the drug economy, breaking bad, but lots of them have been like that.
Great TV, but it also tells you something, which is that the only way for many people to either
live a normal life, which in breaking bad men, funding cancer care, or to accumulate substantial
capital is the drug economy. I mean, large parts of America are now such that the living parts of
the economy are the drug economy and its various extensions, because, of course, it then funds
legitimate businesses and gains hold of them. So that's a very interesting feature, I think, of,
and that connects with our earlier discussion of feudalism. I mean, I think, however much one
criticizes the feudal lords and aristocrats, which I would myself in many ways, they weren't as cruel
or as anarchical as Mexican or Colombian or Russian cartels. I mean, they're extraordinarily cruel.
They're extraordinarily violent and kill enormous numbers of people. And yet, there are large parts
of Latin America and other countries that have fallen into that, that condition. And that connects,
by the way, with another feature of my book, which is very much resisted and might even be
resisted by my Hobbes, if he could be brought back, which is that one of the ways in which I
represent Hobbes as a liberal rationalist and a liberal optimist is that he did think that his
ideas were, which he are in some respects universal, but he did think that they could be applied to get
societies that and fall into what he called a state of nature, that's warring groups,
warring over position and power and resources. They could get out of that by
inventing a sovereign by sort of contract. I don't think history supports that. I think there are
lots of periods in history which show that states of nature in society, state of nature is not
something in Hobbes before society is formed. It's something, it's a condition that societies can
fall into it at any time. They last for ages, centuries even. It's very hard to get out of a
situation like that. And that was something also, by the way, which the liberals of the
Iraq war and of the Libyan regime change didn't understand, which is that it's comparatively
easy to destroy a state. It's extremely difficult to recreate it in Libya, for example. I mean,
one of the features of the current life now is that Libya doesn't just have two governments,
which in practice means it hasn't got any government, but it's also one of the really
principal gateways of illegal migration into Europe. So that problem was, or that reality,
that flow was created by or magnified by the regime change that Cameron and
the French imposed on Libya. I mean, when people say you've got to stamp down on the
gangs and you've got to repress the people's traffickers, that might be possible to do in
Europe where there are still relatively strong states. You can't do it in Libya because there
is, in fact, there is no state. So it just can't be done in there. And that's connected. On how
many occasions have you watched reports about Lampedusa or other migration flows, big libations?
How many times when they mentioned that some of them have come from Libya, how often has it been
mentioned that the Libyan state was destroyed by Western intervention? I would say practically
never. And that's not deliberate, by the way. It's not a conspiracy which we're not going to
mention this. First of all, they never heard they're too young or they're too, they don't know
anything about it. They don't care. The business, the rapid business of generating news doesn't
permit that kind of reflection. It just isn't in the range of thoughts and experiences and histories
that people know. I mean, this to me seems like a core small sea conservative insight
as somebody who's a socialist that agrees with this insight, which is, like you say, it's very,
very easy comparatively to destroy a state, state infrastructure. It's very hard to build it.
And Libya is really the great example here because I tweeted this, I think earlier on the week,
with regards to these floods, tens of thousands of people dying, open air slave markets,
like you say, this is absolutely astonishing stuff. And I say clearly Qaddafi was better. Clearly,
human development index, I think in 2010, they were like 55th in the world,
number one in Africa. Now there are 115th, you know, just human development index is literally
and some of this is measurable. A lot of it is exactly. Yeah, exactly. So clearly, clearly,
you know, you'd want to, you'd probably want to go back in time if you could if you were Libyan.
And then some people said, yeah, but he was going to get Benghazi. Benghazi is now right round by
basically a form of the Taliban. I don't think they recognize quite what they've unleashed.
Well, there's a reason for that, though. It's part of the liberal,
a liberal worldview, which is that nothing can be worse than tyranny.
But lots of things are worse than tyranny. I mean, some tyrannies differ. There can be tyrannies
that are limited in their goals to enriching a few people. And though that might be terrible,
it can be less humanly costly than tyrannies which want to change the whole society according
to some model, which could be communist or fascist. So there can be different kinds of tyrannies.
But it simply isn't true that on any reasonable ethical or empirical assessment that tyrannies
are always the worst thing. Where do you think it ends? Because, you know, we've seen so many
of these mistakes, like I say with Libya, Afghanistan. After it was said by nearly everybody,
this will never happen again. Yeah, it did happen. But people still defend it. That's the thing.
That's what I find really, really interesting. Well, they say that it's because they say
tyranny is the worst thing. They still believe that. And they don't see the necessity. Well,
there's maybe an even deeper reason which wouldn't fit in easily the most aspects of
left-wing thought, which is that much of political life as of much of ethical life
is a choice in which involves options and choices in which whatever is done involves irreparable loss
or even wrong, even injustice. In other words, if you think that, then not just a choice between
evils, because you could say, well, choice between evils, we will maximize the good and minimize
the evil, which is a kind of utilitarian way of thinking. So in a sense, the evils don't matter.
If you get the maximum out of it, the evils don't matter. But I don't think that's
true to human experience. Human experience is of choosing between options, recurring options,
options that don't go away. They keep recurring in different forms in which whatever is done involves
what those who have acted or failed to act recognize to be irreparable losses. I'll tell you
an example from that in the Second World War, which was told me by, I thought I have a link,
which was that a government officer, government official, appeared, or a minister,
even I can't remember now, appeared before his typing pool and said, we're going to sack every
single person who's typing, which would be a great injustice to all but one of you,
because not only will you be sacked, you'll never get a job again. There'll be a black
mark over your security, because you're sacked for security reasons. One of you is leaking,
but we don't know who that is, and we haven't got time to find out. And in the meantime,
brave men and women are being dropped into parts of the inventory and dying terrible deaths,
terrible deaths. So we're sacking a lot of you, and you sacked them all.
Now, the interesting thing about that is, to me, is that he recognized that what he was doing
involved injustice and wrong, not just a utilitarian calculation. He didn't turn into
utilities and said, it'll be more utiles, it'll be more pleasure and less pain in the world.
It was a deep injustice to those who suffered it. Their lives were effectively, their productive
lives were ruined, permanently and irreparably ruined. Even after the war, they'd never get a
job in this, again, but for the sake of a goal, winning the war and also
protecting these people who are going out there to be tortured to death and so on and betrayed.
Now, a basic question for ethics and political theories, will there ever be a point in the human
world where this is to be true? Now, if you're a certain kind of progressive, a certain kind of
Marxist and a certain kind of, there will be, there won't be in my view, there won't be, it'll
always be like this. Why it'll be like this? Because that's what human beings are like.
We are conflicting needs, conflicting impulses, conflicting, even if we had material abundance,
it would appear and these kinds of, but that's something which many people are extremely
resistant. It's an idea which to them is deeply pessimistic. Although you can turn it around
and you can say that in times of tragic choices, they also are periods of context where people
can display extraordinary nobility. They can take on the irreparable loss to themselves even.
I agree with what you've just said there. I say this when you wrote a book about moving to society
beyond capitalism and of a kind of abundance, but not really familiar with. I agree with what
you've just said. And I would say in response that human frailties and all the kinds of discontent
you just talked about will never go away. And in fact, some people have already lived under
conditions of comparative posterity and abundance. We call them the aristocracy. And if you read the
sort of novels like La Classe and these kinds of people. How they lived. Yeah, how they live.
They're often very sad, very tragic. So there's big parts of their lives which don't, you know,
of human experience which won't disappear. And competitive. Yeah. Or quite. But then I suppose
the question is, what's a bigger problem? People are getting upset about love affairs or the
paradox of choice or not being able to feed themselves or dying from diphtheria. But I'm
making an extreme comparison there. But I think you're absolutely right about certain aspects of
these things never. But for many people, it's a hard choice to, it's a hard truth, I would say.
It's a fact. It's a fact of ethical life. There are these recurring situations. And
even in, you see, the paradox emerges for revolutionaries in that in an attempt to create
a world in which these tragic choices don't need to be made or they only occur in personal life
with love affairs and friendships and so on. The revolutionaries find themselves with precise
having to make the decisions and the choices that they want to abolish. So one of the things
that's not understood, as you know, a lot of my book is about Russia and I don't deal with this
part in Russia. One of the reasons that a post-star is Russia turned into a Bolshevik state. And one
of the reasons that was highly repressive was partly Western intervention and partly to struggle
with the whites. But one of the things that happens in all revolutionary situations
is that the revolutionaries struggle among themselves. And the ones that are the least
ruthless, like the Russian anarchists, are the ones that are eliminated, exterminated either
physically or politically marginalized. So that the paradox of revolutionary action, and of all
political action in my view, even, you know, conventional political action, is that if it's
motivated by these grandiose ideas of getting to a world in which tragic choices don't exist,
it will find itself making these choices in order to achieve the world in which they don't exist.
So perpetuating the world in which it is. And I think that's, I think that's, you see, this is
maybe an irreconcilable, I mean, left-wing thinkers and conservative thinkers agree on more than real
left-wing thinkers and real conservative thinkers. I don't mean neoliberals on either side agree on
more than either, usually realize. But there's a fundamental difference between the view that I
take and many people on the left take. And even on the right, of course, the neoliberal right,
if you would say to them, they would say exactly in a way what use they say. Well,
we may get it to a world where the people have to make choices among ethnic cuisines. They may get
to a world in which, I don't know how it could be tragic to choose between Indian and Chinese. But
anyway, we may have a world in which people have unhappy love affairs. They do have unhappy love
affairs. And we may have a world in which people suddenly die of new diseases and so on. So that
might be, that might be, but we won't have a world in which the structures of power are such
that they impose these choices, tragic choices on large numbers of people.
So I suppose there's two, there's two, having read your corpus, read this book,
there's pretty two points of disagreement or interesting conflict and tension. So the first
is you've got a quite justified and understandable contempt, critique of utopianism. I would say
the major problem for the West in the 21st century is the lack of utopia, is anti-utopianism.
Because what it does, and you sort of talk about this a little bit in the book, because you don't
say explicitly, you know, is that, well, okay, living standards have been flat for a long time,
productivity flat of 15 years, yet we really can't get a handle on any one of about a dozen
social challenges that working and middle-class people really care about. But you know what,
you're not a peasant living in 15th century France. So stop complaining. So I think,
so I think there is a real, there's a toolkit for intellectuals and politicians, which I think
was very well suited to the problems of the 20th century. But I think this aversion, skepticism,
hostility to utopianism is increasingly constraining the ability of the West to solve
its basic problems. No, I would think it's slightly different than that. I mean, the difference is that
liberal capitalists don't understand the respects in which they view as utopian.
They don't understand the respects in which it can't be made global or universal.
The more it extends itself, the more fragile it becomes. And they think of it as permanent when
there can be a boom, of course, a boom period. There have been many boom periods in history,
that could last for a while, but they have the seeds in them of their own destruction.
So they, when they say, I mean, this is the, if you like the problem with
what's come to be called capitalist realism, which is it assumes the situation, assumes the system
can be indefinitely malleable and indefinitely managed. So this is a form of the end of history.
Capitalism is a form of the end of history. So you could say, well,
what about the Great Wall Street Cash? Well, that will never be allowed to happen again.
What about the rise of fascism in the 30s? Well, that's not going to happen. It is happening,
actually, under various forms now. But so by the way, we can be sure it's possible if it's actually
happening. One little piece of logic you can get out of philosophy is if something's actually
happening, that's definitely possible. But they say, no, we can, we can, we can manage the system,
we can keep it going, we can, now that might not always be a bad position to take if the alternatives
are very much worse. So if you were, if you're saying to me, if supposing I was in,
by my Germany, and before I was born, and there was a program, someone was, came up with a program
that would somehow have stabilized by my Germany, difficult given what was happening in the world
and so on, and given the conflicts in Central Europe and other impossible, probably, actually.
But would I support it? Yes, I would have supported. It could be, it could even be thought of as a
conservative program or a conservative program. I would have because if I'd had any insight at
that time, which some people I think did actually think how bad it could be, they didn't quite
anticipate the full horrors of Nazism, but they thought it could be pretty bad, including people
on the left. If you could say, well, if this, if this is the, if would I support a, so to speak,
a conservative strategy, then yes, definitely. But the argument then would be, no, that's too,
it's too, I mean, if I, maybe I'm putting these arguments into your mouth, but you could say,
but that assumes there's no alternative at all, that all the alternatives are disastrous,
there could be better alternatives. That's what I think. So for instance, you said that you support
public ownership of, let's say something really uncontroversial, rail, because the franchises
and it's very easy to water is even less controversial. Yeah, very, these are all quite
moderately easy to execute, right? And I think for some people that would be viewed as utopian.
And I think what this feeds into is the anti utopianism as the default. It might, I don't think
you see, they don't, they don't recognize the premise of politics. So for instance, they would say,
well, the shareholders or not, no, they won't have that and the banks and there's,
and that's what they didn't get about Brexit is the primacy of politics. If you have a social
majority wanting something very passionately in a system where people in order to be reelected
have to broadly do what people tell them to do, then that's, there's a difference here.
That's the direction in terms of the outcome. There's a difference. Something can be utopian
in the sense that it includes, it involves a system that has never existed or has never
been, never worked. No, we live in a world where people think that public ownership of rail is
utopian. That's what these people think. We're not in a world where it's like
St. Simon and Fourier, the sea, St. Lemonade, they think public ownership of energy is utopian.
Now, yes, but it may be impossible without being utopian. Again, we know it's not utopian
in the sense of being impossible because it did exist. It's a reputation where I say,
if something did exist, it's not impossible. Again, so their argument against it is by
deploying anti utopianism. Well, if we do that, then we don't know where all that any,
any politics, which is... The really hard truth is that what I would prefer in,
in regard to public utilities is desirable and certainly possible because it existed before,
but may well not be possible for any British government of any complexion as long as it
remains as dependent on capital markets as it is. And that's probably right now.
That's the hard truth. In other words, it is desirable, it is possible, it did occur before,
it could in principle occur again, just not utopian in that sense, not utopian,
but it's also impossible for the foreseeable future. As long as we're as exposed, as long as I've
argued, perhaps, it was not entirely frivolous when I compared Britain in a piece I did in my column
for the two Argentina, one of the richest countries in the world, top 10, which countries 100
years ago, went from being in that position in the 30s and then later to becoming a basket case,
such that it's actually very high, such that now the various
products of the Argentine political culture include radical anti-anarcho-capitalists by
their own description who want to burn down the central bank, they want to abolish the
national currency and replace it by a mixture of dollars and crypto. They want free markets in
sex and also human organs, but they're strongly anti-abortion. I haven't quite worked out how
that works, but anyway, that's what some of them are. Millet, the front-runner for the presidency,
who could, by the way, I think there's a non-trivial chance that he could be elected,
could become, what would he do then? That'd be the interesting thing.
But probably, I mean, I have been to Argentina, it was a long time ago, so I don't know what
it's like now, but the hard truth is that certain social and political systems get themselves into
a historical cul-de-sac from which it's very difficult to get out because their own politicians
are thoroughly corrupt, thoroughly irresponsible, and the global capital markets won't, will veto
anything that could be done anyway, probably. So the really bad prospect for Britain, which I think
is not at all unrealistic, I don't say it's inevitable, but it's not at all unrealistic,
is that we're actually either already or entering that position. And this takes us
on to Brexit because, of course, what people say, well, we wouldn't be as isolated if we're in the
magnificent colossus of Europe, that eternal thing, by the way. I mean, one of the odd things about
the EU is that it's almost like a line from Eliot, T.S. Eliot, he talks about the still point
of an eternal turning world in one of his mystical poems. That's what the EU is for,
the remainder of mind. I don't mean all of those people who voted remain, lots of my friends voted
remain. By the way, the best argument against Brexit I've heard was one put to me by a friend who
said, why are you voting Romain? He said, because the British political class simply isn't up to
making Brexit, they're just hopeless. It's a very good, very good argument. Very powerful argument.
That's the best, I think, the best argument. And it's proved to be true. They weren't up to it.
They didn't want to, and the political class didn't want to do it. It was handed to them,
and they didn't do it. They thought that they put up, they tried to overturn it for several years,
then they accepted it, but even now they didn't accept it. Basically, they still want to reverse
it, as has been seen recently in Stammer's revelation of the fact that he does have one belief,
one feature he has the belief in. Europe, in the EU, the still point in the eternal,
in the eternal. If we're in there, nothing bad can happen to us. Nothing bad can happen to Europe.
One thing's already bad that is Ukraine. That's pretty bad. But also,
many European countries now, for various reasons, partly connected with immigration, partly connected
with climate policy and other factors, have seen a continuing trend, not just the blip
of the emergence of far-right parties. So we're not that way far off a situation in which
the EU will be predominantly a far-right bloc. Now, you would think, wouldn't you,
if the attitude of British Remainers to Europe was empirical and not mystical,
you would think that they would take note of this and say, well, do we really want to be
part of a, we rejoin or in some looser relationship, but still much closer than we are now,
to a bloc in which many governments are dependent on far-right support and which
will probably include 20% of the vote in Germany is far-right. Over 40% of,
I think, if I remember my figures right, of the French electorate in the last presidential
election vote for Le Pen. Do we want to be a part of that? No, they don't say that. They never
discussed the matter because, as you and I, I think, they're not really interested in Europe.
Brexit, for them, was a fetid intratory dispute where they wanted to, they're not doing nothing
about Europe and they don't care about Europe, but it does embody a kind of semi-mystical ideal
for them in which we can escape the problems which are singular to Britain by merging with this other
entity, which has all the virtues that we lack. And it forms, and this is the crucial thing about
their resistance to empirical thinking, which is that this is part of a worldview of those,
which is that all of the experiences since 2006-16 are departures from the normal course of history.
What they cannot and will never understand is that what they and other liberals call populism
is the political blowback, is political blowback against the social disruption that their policies
have produced. They can't understand the connection between what they've done and populism.
Populism comes from nowhere or from very evil people. What they come up with in the end is a
theory of evil. Well, there are these evil demagogues who've been lying around for a long time and they
suddenly emerge and they deceive the gullible masses, the uneducated, the uneducated. That's what,
that's what, it's a theory of evil. It's odd from those who say there isn't such a thing as evil,
there's only error, human beings are indefinitely improvable, they're getting better, but they've
come up with a theory that explains it. But whatever the explanation they might come up with,
2016 onwards, or even before that, is an anomaly in the normal course of human history. The normal
course of human history would have seen Hillary Clinton re-elected. Why didn't that happen?
The Russians, it's usually something exogenous to society, or some mistake that could easily
have been altered but wasn't. Remember at the time they said, well, Trump hasn't got a majority.
They never said that about, but previously, I mean, he had a majority. It's an entire worldview
which is on the line for them, and it's on the line for them partly of course, because they are
the vanguard of the normal course of history. I mean, the normal course of history was that it
would be, which was dislocated or derailed from 2016 onwards. It would be that a transnational,
potentially global, but at least European state, which wasn't an empire, but wasn't
a nation state either. It's not an empire, but it isn't a nation. It's some new, completely new.
And it wants to go all the way to Georgia, but it's definitely not an empire.
But also, it hasn't got most of the, it's where I disagree with some of the Brexit.
They say it's an incipient super state. It isn't an incipient super state.
It hasn't got fiscal union. It hasn't got armed forces. At the moment,
some people on the right of European politics are asking that a naval blockade be put around
a land producer. It hasn't got a navy, small problem. So it isn't a state. It's not going
to become a state, in my view. There is an argument, I mean, some kind of ultra-sophisticated
ex-Brexiteers now say, well, by leaving it, we've made them more likely. Some Remainers
say this too. We've made it more likely for Europe to become a dangerous super state.
Absolute nonsense. There are too many conflicts within Europe and too many problems that
Europe can't resolve. There are conflicts between Poland and Hungary on the one hand,
and even between them, but on the one hand, and Germany and France on the other. Then there's
the Baltic states. Then there's Scandinavia, Sweden. These all have different interests and
different trajectories. But also, in many of the states, as I mentioned earlier,
the far-right which is emerging. It's not a pan-European far-right. These are not the
fascists and Nazis of the 30s who wanted to abolish nations, actually, some of them did.
Some of them were pan-European. They fell up with these small ones, get rid of them, kill them all,
enslave them. They're not, they're nationalists. So actually, the strong, the emerging far-right
groups, they may or may not be proposing to leave the EU, which Le Pen doesn't anymore,
and because actually, the obstacles to leaving, if you're in the euro, are huge.
We were able to leave, when we did leave, just because we weren't in the euro. But if you're in,
it's a revolutionary act, and a revolution of that kind, which would probably involve in Italy and
in France, for example, a devaluation of savings of those who had them in 20, 30, 40%. You're not
going to get bourgeois support for that. I mean, the only people who will want it will be impoverished
young people. Another feature, by the way, of this is that these right-wing movements in Europe
are very often youth movements. Very much lost on English speakers. They think that young people
are all liberals and not in Europe and not in America now. I mean, the conversion rate into
far-right positions is high, very high among young people.
Amongst the one, the cohort below Gen Z is particularly concerning, actually. But what's
interesting is, if you look at, I think, people now entering college, 18 to 21-year-olds,
there is this extraordinary divergence in political sympathies by gender in the US,
which is just, obviously, that's always existed to some extent, but now it's just,
it's blown up in the last five years. It's partly for a reason, which I read about in the book,
which is back in the early 90s, when I first got the idea that America might come a cropper
because of its internal divisions. Can we say a cropper? What do you mean, a civil war?
Not civil war. No, it could be civil warfare, which is chronic sort of low-level violence
and disruption of institutions, but was partly because of abortion. America's different,
not different from everywhere. It's also been conflicts in Poland and some European countries.
But America is, because of its religious composition and others, and that spills
over into a gender politics. And it's one of the reasons that DeSantis, I think, never really had
a chance, because unlike Trump, who could flirt with the pro-life wife, who doesn't believe any of
it, and everybody knows he doesn't believe any of it, DeSantis really did. So he really would
have pushed, I think, and I think that would have killed Republican support among many Republican
women, killed at Stone Dead. They don't want to lose this freedom. Why should they? They may not
find the present situation satisfactory in many ways, and because one of the reasons I
argued this back in the 1890s is that turning values into rights works when the values are
broadly and generally accepted in society. So you can have a right against torture, you can have a
right, various rights of free speech and so on, though defining them is not always easy.
But if a value position is turned into a right, which is deeply controversial in the society,
which is deeply disputed and conflicted, as abortion always has been in America,
then in the long run, and it may take, as it did take 30 years for this to happen, back then,
what I wrote was the inevitable result is that the constitutional, the supreme constitutional
authority will become an object of political capture. If it constitutionalizes rights to
activities that a third or a quarter of the population or regard is basically wrong,
in the long run, which has taken a generation, there will be a pushback by the conservatives,
and that was achieved under Trump, that would point these conservative judges, who had various
complex constitutional arguments why abortion should never have been turned into a right,
but all of those are irrelevant to me, they're just local American fetishes about constitutionalism.
The real reason is that rights cannot insulate from politics, culture and other conflicts,
which are deep-seated. If you try to do that, you eventually threaten the regime.
But this is very relevant to the UK context, because we, of course, now have a Supreme Court.
Yes, we do.
Which is very alien to the...
Well, it's American in position.
Yeah, and that was Blair.
Yeah, well, I love talking to conservatives about this, because I say, look, if we had Lord
Derrierev and the courts wouldn't be in this mess, sentencing wouldn't be like...
Absolutely.
The police, this would not be anything like this, and there's probably something to that.
But what's interesting with Blair is, when he introduces the Supreme Court,
I don't think he realises the gravity of what he's doing.
No, he didn't.
He didn't.
You're changing the complexion of the democracy quite fundamentally.
Rightly.
Well, I agree with that 100% herein, because what it's done is,
it's produced a kind of...
I mean, the American system has produced its pathologies, which is that everything is litigated.
It's part...
And if you capture this one body, you control the...
You know, like...
Controls everything.
But everything is litigated.
And politics becomes...
Law becomes a surrogate for politics.
But when law becomes a surrogate for politics, law becomes politicised.
And eventually, that politics becomes Schmidian politics, the politics of enemies,
which has happened now in America.
That's one end point of that.
Now, we are in a kind of halfway house here, which is that
lawfare was promoted by the Remainers, but it now covers vast swathes of government activity,
to the point at which it's even questionable whether we have a government, actually,
because you could say, well, we should do this.
You say, well, yes, but you'll have to.
I mean, this would be a good thing to do.
There might even be agreement, but it'll be litigated.
We stop for years.
We should build more houses.
I'm not saying whether we should or we shouldn't, but we should build more houses.
We can't do that because it'll be endlessly litigated through the courts by the Nimbis,
which does.
And in that circumstance, what it produces in Britain is not yet,
or not so much the Schmidian politics of enmity,
but paralysis, in which nothing can actually be done on a wide range of issues,
unless you're ready to get out of the European Convention of Human Rights,
which a few conservatives and others are.
Anything that's done about immigration will be litigated,
whether you agree with it or not, anything.
And many other issues, I mean, issues of town planning and of building and so it applies to them all.
So what we've got in Britain is a kind of paralyzing version of lawfare,
and it does, I think, emerge primarily, well, at least the starting point of it was Blair's creation.
I mean, the very name tells you what he was doing.
He was trying to sort of superimpose on a fundamentally different system of parliamentary sovereignty.
Let me go.
History of ideas.
I used to be a historian of ideas and I spent 20 years
working and reading about John Stuart Mill.
When John Stuart Mill writes about liberty, his background idea is not a court.
There wasn't a Supreme Court.
There was parliamentary sovereignty, which was pretty well absolute.
By the way, it was absolute, up to and including Thatcher.
She could do whatever she wanted.
I mean, feasibly, it's still here, right?
They could scrap the Supreme Court if there was an act of Parliament to get rid of the Supreme Court.
Legally, it could all still be scrapped, but there's not the political will then.
There won't be.
Well, I think I'm sort of surprised the Tories never talk about that.
Oh, they have been talking about the European Convention.
I mean, the Supreme Court, because that's lower hanging fruit, right?
It would be semi-revolutionary.
I mean, in a sense, again, look what's happening in Israel.
Similar in some respects to us, that there isn't a fixed constitution.
There isn't a written constitution.
The attempt by Netanyahu to get to limit, even just limit,
not abolish the Supreme Court produced profound internal divisions.
I also followed and I even went there for on some occasions.
I followed the evolution of political development in New Zealand.
Now, New Zealand was interesting because its original constitution
was an extreme version of the British constitution,
which is that there were no set rights.
There was no Supreme Court.
When I went in the early 90s, late 80s, there was no second chamber.
It was a billiard hall, at least when I visited them.
And I think the second chamber was abolished there in the 1950s.
So there was one Parliament which could do anything.
And that was why, by the way, that was the reason,
the basic fundamental constitutional political reason,
why neoliberalism there was more radical than anywhere else.
It's the only country of which I'm aware in which farming was marketized,
radically marketized.
Usually power, you can do all sorts of things about farm,
but you actually just defund them completely, which they did, almost unthinkable.
And it all happened rather quickly.
There were local reasons for that, which is that the
their Labour Party was taken over by someone with strong neoliberal views,
but a somewhat left-wing foreign policy.
And that led to the left to think that none of this was going to happen.
Or it was obvious to me that it was going to happen.
But it was also obvious to me that it would melt down for various reasons,
because they started talking about changing the electoral system,
which they did, and then the party consolation of parties all changed.
So most of what had been done was kept,
but some of the more extreme entries for their faturism were sort of made.
A bit more bearable.
But you're absolutely right about this.
I think Blair didn't grasp what a fundamental change was.
Or maybe he did, but he thought it would be coherent.
He didn't understand that underneath, there'd still be parliament,
there'd still be local authorities, and they would be political bodies.
And then you superimpose this structure of law going up to the Supreme Court.
But the Supreme Court still can't overrule parliament.
If parliament comes up with a decision, which is what it wants,
but the political will is absent.
In practice, what that means is my political hope,
insofar as I still have any, is for a hung parliament,
which may not happen either.
There may not be a hung parliament because of what's happened in Scotland.
The meltdown of the SNP may give Labour a working majority,
in which case there will not be proportional representation.
I've now come to the view, which I have posed for many, many, many years.
But I pride myself on being something of an empiricist.
So I come to this view from observations and evidence that electoral reform
is a precondition of any kind of emergence of better political ideas
and better political coalitions in Britain.
And the reason I came to that is that the principal argument
against proportional representation is that it doesn't produce strong government,
but we've had governments with massive majorities that have been weak,
very weak, have been locked in internal 80 majority,
produced chaos and anarchy and various kinds of internal party conflict and division,
and achieved nothing, basically.
So having that experience and seeing all the parties converging on the non-existent centre,
that strange confluence of watered down policies,
all of which are opposed by the British majority.
And the only way that can be broken up is by changing the electoral system.
And I think that is possible. There may yet be a hung parliament.
And if there isn't a hung parliament this time, there may be after that.
Because one thing I would confidently make a prediction, many other things.
It's not clear who's going to win the American elections,
not clear whether Biden will be around, not clear what's going to happen.
But in Britain, I'm pretty confident Labour will be overwhelmed quite quickly
if it becomes a government.
Because it has nothing, essentially.
Its only policies are a green agenda, which is not affordable
and which imposes disproportionate costs on working people.
So we'll be rejected by the trade unions and already is being to some extent.
And a pro-European policy, which is anachronistic, a nostalgist,
and won't occur, probably something like that.
Probably won't occur.
Because it will be difficult to legitimate democratically in Britain,
any really transformative re-engagement with Europe.
So it's a cul-de-sac that they're moving into.
That will break down and then something else will happen.
It's interesting about the parliamentary sovereignty bit,
because Ramsay McDonald said this in the early 20th century,
which is, we don't need to do what the Bolsheviks have done in Russia.
We have a sovereign parliament, which gives the person with the largest number of seats
an extraordinary amount of power.
I want to finish this.
But that's one of my, I'm not a socialist.
It's one of my objections to the EU.
It's constructed to make socialism impossible.
Yeah, well, moderate social democracy.
No, I mean, it's constructed to make social democracy impossible.
I mean, if it achieved all its goals, it would have done that.
It would have been a vast neoliberal market of capital and labour.
That's what it explicitly is.
So what I find puzzling among on the left, moderate or radical left,
is that they hold out these hopes and illusions about the EU.
It's very explicit what the EU wants.
They want a neoliberal continent.
Last question.
You talk about the rise of hyper-liberal ideology
and the woke religion of surplus elites.
So I'm going to read this quote here.
Hyper-liberal ideology plays a number of roles.
It operates as a rationale for a failing variety of capitalism
in a vehicle through which surplus elites struggle to secure a position
of power in society.
And so far as it expresses a coherent system of ideas,
it is the anti-Western creed of an antinomian intelligentsia
that is ineffably Western.
So this is fascinating.
There's a lot of packed into this.
Yeah, that's fascinating.
So this idea that hyper-liberalism, woke movement, etc.,
is drawing upon the intellectual reservoirs of Western liberalism
in order to attack Western liberalism.
And you see really strong parallels between that
and sort of late Tsarist Russia.
I do see some parallels,
but the interesting point I would make now,
I mean, there wouldn't have been the Russian Revolution
if there hadn't been the First World War.
Of course, there could be a bigger war than we've had so far.
It could be that the United States would get into a war.
I think it's quite unlikely, actually, with China.
And it's very unclear who would prevail
or who would lose the most from that war.
So there can be more than one comparison.
But the key thing about the hyper-liberals
is I think the key contradiction or paradox in them
is on the one hand, they're tremendously anti-Western,
or claim to be the anti-colonial.
They think Western societies are incurably rotten.
Western civilization was a blot on the planet and on human history.
And on the other hand, their ideological goals
of deconstructing the self of radical autonomy
are all hyperbolic versions of Western ideals.
And not only that.
They think that all the countries in the world
will have to go through this process.
They think that the Taliban must become liberal.
I don't know if anything's wrong with the Taliban,
in my view, at least.
But is there only one alternative?
Deconstructionist, radical hyperliberalism?
They're not going to become like that.
Most of the world isn't like that.
Indeed, the hyperliberalism of America
is strongest in the Anglesphere.
Beyond that, it's weak in Eastern post-communist Europe.
It's very weak in India.
It's weak in China.
It's very weak.
It's regarded in most of the world with a mixture of
gleeful, chadenoid, and pity and contempt.
Nobody admires it.
And yet, it's very strong in the Anglesphere
in many parts of the world.
So America's in this strange paradoxical position now,
when hyperliberals are that.
America has no soft power in the world.
I mean, there's no country in the world
and no where there are strong majorities
which see America as an ideal to be adopted.
There are some people that emigrate to America
from Latin America, Haiti, China to some extent, India.
But it has no soft power.
And yet, this parochial, peculiar American ideology
which universalizes certain American dilemmas and problems,
certain features of racism and colonialism,
some of which are universal.
But the ones out there, what that universe is,
their own peculiar parochial history
has spread in many other parts of the world.
So it's a projection of a hyperbolic projection
of certain Western ideals and forms of thinking,
Christianity to some extent, which is a cult of the victim.
The Enlightenment, which is part of a cult of human autonomy,
are radicalized to an extreme point.
And then the idea is the whole world is,
isn't it going to become like that?
Five or 10 years from now,
certainly 20 years from now,
the situation in Britain and Europe and in America
will be unrecognizably different because this is not,
I don't know what it'll be, it'll be quite different from now.
But it won't be one in which this is stable,
hyperliberal elite running everything.
So there are huge movements of discontent,
some of them very unpleasant movements,
some of them horrifying movements in Europe and elsewhere,
but they're vast movements.
For example, in their song,
Rich Men North of Richmond in America,
you heard about that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
How many views did it get?
Now, the left is furious about that
and the liberals are furious about this.
I'm writing about this shortly,
I've written about it in the New States,
but they're furious about it because they say,
well, it's not really a critique of capitalism,
it's racism.
Richmond was the capital of the Confederate regime
and so on in the Civil War, it's all terrible stuff.
But why has it got so many listeners?
One of the reasons is surely that
the marginalization and the suffering
and the loss of a productive role
of millions and millions of Americans,
along with the stagnant incomes
of millions and millions more,
in other words, the rise of extreme inequality
and so on, is being either ignored
or very inadequately treated by the mainstream parties.
That's the reason.
So there's no way that,
there's no way out of this situation
and put it into a very simple thing.
Whoever wins the next presidential election in America
will not be accepted as legitimate
by at least a third of the population.
So they've entered what Marxists used to call
a legitimation crisis.
They're already in it
and it will become acute after the next election.
Whoever wins, because whoever wins
is not going to win by a sweeping majority.
Worse than that, there'll be a large block,
20, 30, 40% maybe,
who regard it as not just of Trumpists.
What if Trump wins?
He will regard it as illegitimate
by liberals and Democrats.
It's entered an irreversible period
of legitimation crisis.
It doesn't mean the state's going to collapse.
It doesn't mean there's going to be anarchy.
It doesn't mean there's going to be civil war,
like in the 1860s,
but it does mean that it'll be a dysfunctional state
which is semi-failed
and probably will withdraw
if there isn't an accidental big war before then
probably will withdraw
for some of its major commitments abroad
to begin with Ukraine
and possibly even its support for Taiwan.
In other words, turn into a more,
there might be a goal of an autocratic economy
which America could achieve,
if anyone can, probably in the United States,
mixed with a willingness to trade
on negotiators with anybody, including China.
So it could be that this whole anti-Chinese,
I mean, it's more deeply rooted than the support for Ukraine,
but it could be that this whole anti-Chinese,
by the way, I'm strongly critical
of many aspects of the Chinese regime
and I also regard it as a threat.
Espionage and other things, absolutely real.
They're not made up by conspiracy theories.
They're real, real threats.
But America's not ready for war.
It's not prepared for war.
I don't convince it will fight a war
and that it's the economic interests
of many sectors of American society
wouldn't benefit from because a lot of companies,
I mean, America, it's unlike the Cold War, fundamental point.
The relationship between America and China
is completely unlike the Cold War
because they co-dependent economically,
which the Soviet Union and the West was not in the course.
Fundamentally different situation.
So it'll be something different will happen out there.
War could happen by accident,
but if it doesn't happen by accident,
I think the most likely outcome
is that America will fall in on itself,
introvert, become even more introverted
than it is really actually now.
And that would fundamentally change
the whole world geopolitical situation,
including in Europe,
because America's never been stronger in Europe
than it is now.
If the rug is pulled on that,
what happens in Europe?
Not just in Ukraine, but in other parts of it.
What happens?
What happens to the EU, for example?
So I think we are approaching
an historical juncture in which
certain options, which have been options,
will cease to be options.
And other options will be sort of embedded for some time.
And that's not a deterministic or a fatalistic view,
but it's one which accepts the irreversibility
of historical changes.
Even neo feudalism isn't feudalism.
And also accepts that
the situation that we're in now, politically speaking,
is in some respects a tragic one.
John Gray, thanks so much for joining us.
No, thank you for your questions.
And thank you for the very interesting conversation
in which you've put counterarguments
from which I've learned.
I'm very glad to hear it.
My pleasure.
Thank you.